## Criminal Law TA Session {#slide-1}

Corine Forward, February 09, 2021

## Unintended Homicide: Felony-Murder {#slide-2}

Common Law

Refers to causing death in the course of perpetrating another felony. Strict liability offense in the sense that it doesn't require a distinct mens rea to kill; rather, the intent to commit felony accounts for the mens rea that resulted in the death of victim.

MPC § 201.2

Has no standalone felony-murder provision. Doesn't make felony-murder a strict liability offense but creates a presumption of recklessness (a conscious appreciation and disregard as to risk of death) when a homicide occurs during the commission of certain felonies. MPC doesn't like the felony-murder rule, but most states nonetheless retain some form of the rule

## Unintended Homicide: Felony-Murder {#slide-3}

Regina v.  Serné   (UK 1887)

Facts :  Leon  Serné  and his family were in severe debt, living in house above a store in London.  Serné  had taken out a life insurance policy on his son  Sjaak  (an imbecile), and insured store inventory, furniture, and rent. Within a month the store and house burned down, and both his sons died. At trial, prosecution introduced evidence that  Serné  and Goldfinch had been seen together in the shop shortly before the fire started. It was alleged they willfully set fire and were indicted for  Sjaak's  murder.

Holding :  Only an action taken w/ intent to commit a felony that is known to create a danger to human life can constitute felony-murder.

 

## Unintended Homicide: Felony-Murder {#slide-4}

Regina v.  Serné   (UK 1887)

Takeaway :  Felony-murder is homicide caused by an action that is (1) dangerous in and of itself, (2) likely to result in the death of another, and (3) taken by a defendant with the intent to commit a felony.

Rule :  When one does an act known to be dangerous to life, for the purpose of committing a felony, the act is chargeable as murder.

 

## Unintended Homicide: Felony-Murder {#slide-5}

People v. Stamp  (Cal. 1969)

Facts :  Defendant burglarized  Honeyman's  store, robbed him at gunpoint. After,  Honeyman  (60-year-old w/ history of heart disease) died of a heart attack. Doctors testified that the fright from the robbery was too much of a shock to  Honeyman's  system .

Holding :  First-degree murder conviction is upheld.

Felony-murder doctrine not limited to foreseeable deaths; a felon is instead held strictly liable for all killings committed by him/his accomplices in the course of the felony.

As long as the homicide is the direct causal result of the robbery the felony-murder rule applies whether or not the death was a natural/probable consequence of the robbery.

The robber takes his victim as he finds him.

 

## Unintended Homicide: Felony-Murder {#slide-6}

State v. Canola  (NJ 1977)

Facts :  Jewelry store owner resisted an attempted armed robbery by defendant (Canola) and his accomplices. One accomplice and the store owner exchanged gunfire, both died. Defendant and two accomplices indicted on one count of robbery and two counts of murder (store owner and co-felon). Defendant found guilty on both murder counts and sentenced to two concurrent terms of life imprisonment .

Issue :  Under NJ law, can a defendant be found guilty of felony-murder when during his robbery of a store one of the robbery victims shoots one of the defendant's accomplices ?

Holding :   No, under NJ law, a defendant cannot be found guilty of the killing of an accomplice by the armed robbery victim

 

## Unintended Homicide: Common Law {#slide-7}

Common Law Elements

Accused does not intend to kill her victim, but malice is implied because the defendant's conduct demonstrates  extreme recklessness  or  indifference to human life .

Under the MPC, what is known as depraved heart murder at common law is collapsed under what the MPC  defines as "reckless murder," which requires a mens rea of recklessness. 

MPC § 210.2(b): Unintended Murder 

Unintended killing is murder when it is committed recklessly and "under circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value of human life." 

## Unintended Homicide: Depraved Heart {#slide-8}

Commonwealth v. Malone  (PA 1946)

Facts :  A 17-year-old killed his 13-year-old friend while playing Russian poker.

Rule :  When an individual commits an act of gross recklessness for which he must reasonably anticipate that death to another is  likely  to result, he exhibits that "wickedness of disposition, hardness of heart, cruelty, recklessness of consequences, and a mind regardless of social duty" which proves that malice was present.

Issue :  Whether the defendant's actions constitute malice.

Holding :  Charge of murder is correct.

Malice here is evidenced by defendant's "doing of an uncalled-for act in callous disregard of its likely harmful effects on others."

Lack of motive is not dispositive.

## Unintended Homicide: Model Penal Code {#slide-9}

MPC § 210.3 Manslaughter

(a) committed recklessly; or

(b) murder + extreme mental or emotional disturbance for which there is a reasonable explanation/excuse

Reasonableness from perspective of a person in the defendant's situation under the circumstances as he believes them to be.

This is a very subjective standard, which can be more defendant friendly.

Manslaughter is a felony of the second degree

MPC § 210.4 Negligent Homicide

(1) committed negligently

(2) Negligent homicide is a felony of the third degree

## Unintended Homicide: Involuntary Manslaughter {#slide-10}

Commonwealth v.  Welansky   (Mass. 1944)

Facts :  Defendant, owner of a night club in Boston, was charged with involuntary manslaughter for the death of hundreds of patrons at his club as a result of a fire. As owner of club, defendant had a legal duty to his invitees to use reasonable care in keeping the premises safe for their use and preventing (un)known dangers.

Statute :  Involuntary manslaughter requires wanton or reckless conduct.

Holding :  Conviction is upheld.

(1) He was aware that venue was not in compliance w/ local safety regulation; and 

(2) He knew that construction plans for new part of lounge precluded the possibility of installing the doors necessary to comply w/ safety regulations.

Takeaway :  Wanton/reckless conduct = Intentional conduct, by commission or omission, that has a high likelihood of substantial harm

Goes beyond civil negligence

## Unintended Homicide: Negligent Homicide  {#slide-11}

People v. Hall  (Colo. 2000)

Facts :  While skiing, defendant collided with victim who was on the slope below. Victim died as a result. Defendant was charged with reckless manslaughter.

Statute : Reckless manslaughter requires that a person "recklessly cause the death of another person."

Conduct is reckless when the actor  consciously disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk  that death may result. MPC § 2.02.

Issue :  What's a substantial and unjustifiable risk?

Holding :  A risk of death that has less than a 50% chance of occurring can still be substantial. 

Here, it was a substantial risk given how reckless D was being.

A reasonably prudent person could have concluded that D created a substantial, unjustifiable risk.

## Unintended Homicide: Negligent Homicide  {#slide-12}

State v. Williams  (Wash. Ct. App. 1971)

Facts :  Native American mother and stepfather of baby were convicted of manslaughter for negligently failing to take their baby to a doctor when he had an abscessed tooth that became infected and developed gangrene .

Statute :  In Washington, involuntary manslaughter is committed if the death of the victim is the proximate result of simple/ordinary/civil negligence .

Holding :  The failure so to do in this case is ordinary or simple negligence, and such negligence is sufficient to support a conviction of statutory manslaughter .

Defendants were sufficiently put on notice concerning the symptoms of the baby's illness and lack of improvement in the baby's apparent condition in the period from September 1 to September 5, 1968 to have required them to have obtained medical care for the child .

## Exercise {#slide-13}

See handout

Directions

Use the newly provided statutes (these are from  the 2019(?)  exam; recall that you will likely have new statutes to do a close reading of and interpret on the exam.) 

Apply those to the hypo

Questions:

What is the highest charge a prosecutor could rightfully   bring? 

What are the defenses to that charge (to the extent that you know them so far)? 

Who has the stronger argument for that charge? 
