## Criminal Law TA Session {#slide-1}

Corine Forward, February 23, 2021

## Capital Punishment: Model Penal Code {#slide-2}

MPC § 210.6 

(1) Circumstances that exclude imposition of the death penalty

(2) Procedural requirements for a death sentence, namely a separate proceeding

(3) Aggravating circumstances

Committed by convict under sentence of imprisonment

Previously convicted of another murder

Committed another murder at the same time

Knowingly created a great risk of death to many persons

Committed while engaging in a violent felony

Committed for the purpose of avoiding or preventing a lawful arrest or effecting an escape from lawful custody

Committed for pecuniary gain

Especially heinous, atrocious, or cruel, manifesting exceptional depravity 

## Capital Punishment: Model Penal Code {#slide-3}

MPC § 210.6 

(4) Mitigating circumstances

No significant history of prior criminal activity

Committed while defendant was influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance

Victim was participant in defendant's homicidal conduct or consented to homicidal act

Committed under circumstances which the defendant believed to provide a moral justification or extenuation for his conduct

Accomplice in a murder committed by another person and his participation was relatively minor

Acted under duress or under the domination of another person

At time of murder, capacity of defendant to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct or to conform his conduct to requirements of law was impaired by mental disease or intoxication

Youth of the defendant at time of murder

## Capital Punishment: Case {#slide-4}

Gregg v. Georgia  (1976)

Facts :  Gregg convicted of death-eligible homicides. The jury imposed the death penalty pursuant to statutory guidelines.

Issue :  Whether the death sentence of murder is a per se violation of the Eight (cruel and unusual punishment) and Fourteenth (equal protection/due process) Amendments

Holding :  No, and Georgia's death penalty statute does not violate the Constitution.

Under  Furman , the imposition of the death penalty cannot be arbitrary or capricious.

Here, we have a carefully drafted statute that ensures the sentencing authority has enough information and guidance.

Georgia's statute (described on pp. 570--572) is adequately particularized to the defendant's circumstances

## Capital Punishment: Case {#slide-5}

Atkins v. Virginia  (2002)

Facts :  Atkins was convicted of a death-eligible murder. An expert witness testified that he was "mildly mentally retarded." Evidence showed he had an IQ of only 59. Atkins was sentenced to death.

Issue :  Whether the Eighth Amendment prohibits death sentences for mentally retarded defendants.

Holding :  Yes, it is a cruel and unusual punishment.

It is consensus that mentally retarded/intellectually handicapped people are less culpable for their conduct than those with "normal" intellectual capacities. Administering like punishment for unequal culpability offends  retributive  notions.

They are also less deterred because of their lesser ability to process information, control impulses, etc., which offends notions of  deterrence .

Also less capable of providing meaningful assistance to counsel to defend their cases.

## Capital Punishment: Theory {#slide-6}

Steiker  &  Steiker ,  Sober Second Thoughts

The death penalty is inherently unfair because the guidelines are not objective.

The Court backtracked after  Furman , where it looked like the death penalty was on its way out.

Invalidated 39 states' capital statutes.

Gregg  essentially rubber-stamped 35 states' reworded statutes.

Death penalty is not per se cruel and unusual punishment under the Eighth Amendment.

Court is now in the business of determining which states' capital punishment schemes are constitutionally acceptable.

Applauds "clear and objective standards"

But there aren't enough guidelines. Whatever guidelines/standards there are, aren't adequately objective.

 

## Capital Punishment: Theory {#slide-7}

Steiker  &  Steiker ,  Sober Second Thoughts

Narrowing hasn't worked.

Study showed that 86% of murder convicts over 5-year period were death-eligible.

Courts have been hesitant to narrow death-eligible cases on grounds that death is disproportionate to the crime committed

Gregg  invoked need for heightened reliability, but procedural protections aren't adequately robust.

Ineffective assistance of counsel receives no special review compared to crime involving a far lesser sentence.

Court-appointed capital lawyers are notoriously bad ( cf.  Bright).

Discusses the "hegemony" of (capital) punishment

Idea that current modes of punishment are unassailable features of criminal justice.

We can't divorce imprisonment, fines, death sentences, probation, etc. from our conceptions of criminal justice.

 

## Capital Punishment: On an Exam {#slide-8}

Read question 2 on Spring 2018 exam and the model answer 857.

 

## Loose Ends {#slide-9}

 

## Mapping Felony Murder {#slide-10}

                                 Target of felony Victim   Innocent Bystander Victim   Codefendant Victim
  ------------------------------ ------------------------- --------------------------- --------------------
  Defendant kills\...                                                                  
  Codefendant kills\...                                                                
  Target of felony kills\...                                                           
  Police kills\...                                                                     
  Innocent bystander kills\...                                                         

## Mapping Felony Murder: NYPL 125.25 {#slide-11}

                                 Target of felony Victim   Innocent Bystander Victim   Codefendant Victim
  ------------------------------ ------------------------- --------------------------- --------------------
  Defendant kills\...            Yes                       Yes                         No (?)
  Codefendant kills\...          Yes                       Yes                         No
  Target of felony kills\...     No                        No                          No
  Police kills\...               No                        No                          No
  Innocent bystander kills\...   No                        No                          No

## More Causation Issues  {#slide-12}

People v. Campbell  (1983)

Facts :  After drinking heavily, Campbell was angry w/  Basnaw  for having sex w/ Campbell's wife. Campbell encouraged  Basnaw  to kill himself and Campbell thereafter wished he would. Campbell sold  Basnaw  a gun. After  Basnaw  committed suicide with the gun, Campbell was charged with murder.

Issue :  Whether defendant can be indicted on a charge of murder?

Holding :  No. 1. No homicide took place  bc  the defendant did not kill another person. 2. Defendant had no present intention to kill. Campbell hoped that  Basnaw  would kill himself but hope alone is not the degree of intention requisite to a charge of murder.

Suicide, by definition, is not homicide (killing a person by an act of another). The simple overt act of providing the means for killing doesn't amount to a homicide.

 "Hope" is insufficient for a charge of murder.

Takeaway: (1) Causing suicide as some form of intentional homicide must be statutorily defined. (2) Intent is a high bar---beyond just wanting a result to occur.

## More Causation Issues  {#slide-13}

People v. Kevorkian  (1994)

Facts :  The defendant (doctor) allegedly assisted in the deaths of Miller and  Wantz , roughly a year before Michigan enacted a statute that prohibited giving assistance in suicide. He was indicted on two counts of murder. 

Issue :  Whether defendant can be indicted on a charge of murder by assisting in suicide.

Holding :  No. A conviction of murder is proper if a defendant participates in the final overt act that causes death, but not where a defendant is involved merely in the events leading up to the commission of the final overt act.

Their death was foreseeable, but his actions weren't the actual cause -- there was an intervening cause that absolves him of responsibility

Pushing the needle (pulling the trigger) = murder. Furnishing the poison or the gun (aka providing the means) = assisted suicide 

Takeaway:  Kevorkian  and  Campbell  give you both (major) elements for murder

Campbell: Hope for a result ≠ intending a result (mens rea)

Kevorkian: Must participate in the final overt act that causes death (conduct/causing a result)

## Enjoy Spring Break!! {#slide-14}

- I will send a hypo after this session that you can do over spring break

<!-- -->

- Happy to read over answers, will debate in our next session

<!-- -->

- Things are moving quickly but brace yourselves, the work is not going to get much harder for this class
- Try to meet with Prof. Harcourt
- I am available for individual one on one meets, email me to talk about anything!
- 
