## Criminal Law TA Session {#slide-1}

Corine Forward, March 30, 2021

## Law Enforcement Use of Lethal Force {#slide-2}

Grand juries are standing juries, drawn from regular jury pool, who hear evidence presented by prosecutors

Prosecutors usually call 1-2 witnesses (maybe more), typically the reporting officer and  vic

Standard: probable cause (not a high bar): It requires only the "kind of fair probability" on which reasonable and prudent \[people,\] not legal technicians, act" (internal quotations omitted)

Grand jury decisions are not verdicts, they are indictments a.k.a. true bills -- the formal charge

## Re Eric Garner  {#slide-3}

The grand jury was tasked with

1) deciding whether there was sufficient evidence to believe that Officer Pantaleo violated any of the homicide provisions of the New York Penal Law and 

2) whether Officer Pantaleo's actions were justified as the legal use of force by a law enforcement officer in effecting an arrest

Under NY Penal Law:

Garner violated a Cigarette and tobacco products tax law (See TAX§ 1814) by selling them individually and not paying taxes on them. At worst this is a misdemeanor.

For purposes of use of non-lethal physical force, Pantaleo "may use \[NON-LETHAL\] physical force when and to the extent he reasonably believes such to be necessary to effect the arrest"

Chokehold seems to qualify for lethal force?

Lethal force defined as anything that  would cause serious physical injury or death

But if not lethal, then don't get the deadly physical force provisions nor the limitation it imposes. 

A defense  arg : maneuver was not deadly physical force therefore don't look at those provisions or  arg  there was an issue with causation 

## Necessity and Duress:  Case Study {#slide-4}

Regina v. Dudley and Stephens (UK 1884)

Facts :  Sailors were shipwrecked out at sea, 1,600 miles from the Cape of Good Hope. A handful of crewmembers and the captain were stranded on a smaller boat. Dudley and Stephens killed a boy for food, to the captain's and the boy's dissent. The seamen were later saved.

Issue :  Is the killing of one stranded seaman to save the others a killing of necessity, such that the killing is justified?

Holding :  No necessity defense is available to preserve your own life.

"Absolute divorce of law from morality would be of fatal consequence"

"It is not correct, to say that there is any absolute or unqualified necessity to preserve one's life"

Takeaway :  Don't forget about deterrence.

## Necessity:  Common Law {#slide-5}

Common Law Requirements

A threat of imminent injury to the person or property,

What's imminent?  See, e.g. ,  Norman .

Traditionally natural causes like a blizzard

No (reasonable) alternatives except the commission of the crime,

An objective standard independent of the defendant's beliefs

The defendant's otherwise criminal conduct would prevent an equal or more serious harm, AND

Choice of evils: Use the same or less harm/evil/force or suffer the threat of injury

The defendant hasn't created the conditions of his own dilemma.

For example, the defendant couldn't have provoked the incoming harm.

## Necessity:  Model Penal Code {#slide-6}

MPC § 3.02

(1) Conduct which the actor believes to be necessary to avoid a harm or evil to himself or to another is justifiable, provided that:

(a) the harm or evil sought to be avoided is greater than that sought to be prevented by the law defining the offense charged;

(b) neither the Code nor other law defining the offense provides exceptions or defenses dealing with the specific situation involved; AND

(c) a legislative purpose to exclude the justification claimed does not plainly appear

(2) When the actor was reckless or negligent in bringing about the situation requiring a choice of harms or evils, the necessity defense is unavailable for conduct involving the mens rea of recklessness or negligence. 

## Necessity:  Model Penal Code {#slide-7}

MPC § 3.02

Important points:

The belief of necessity is purely subjective, but the (sub-)prongs are purely objective.

Does not require imminence

Does not restrict the defense to situations involving a threat of death or serious bodily harm

Ordinary harm is fine to the extent that the harm you inflict is equal to or less than avoided harm.

Defense is available in a homicide

Unlike in  Dudley and Stephens

## Necessity:  Case Law {#slide-8}

People v. Unger  (Ill. 1977)

Facts :  Defendant was an inmate at a state prison (farm) & was subjected to threats of sexual violence and actual sexual violence. Defendant sought help but escaped after he received death threats. He claimed that he planned to return once he could find help.

Holding :  Unger is entitled to raise the necessity defense for jury consideration.

Reasoning :  This isn't about duress, which requires deprivation of free will.  Lovercamp  factors for prison escape are instructive, but not controlling. Incarcerated people are entitled to the same necessity defense as everyone else. 

Specific, immediate threat of death, forcible sexual attack, or substantial bodily harm

No time for a complaint to authorities or a history of futile complaints

No time to resort to courts

No evidence of force or violence towards prison staff or other innocent people in the escape

Incarcerated person immediately reports to the proper authorities when he is a safe place 

## Necessity:  Case Law {#slide-9}

U.S. v. Schoon  (9th Cir. 1992)

Facts :  The defendants barged into the IRS and protested the federal government's involvement in El Salvador. They caused a ruckus inside the building and were arrested. Defendants claimed necessity.

Holding :  Defendants are not entitled to the necessity defense.

Reasoning :  Four necessary elements to prove necessity:

Faced with a choice of evils and choose the lesser evil

Acted to prevent imminent harm

Reasonably anticipated a direct causal relationship between their conduct and the harm to be avoided

No legal alternatives to violating the law

Necessity is inapplicable in cases involving indirect civil disobedience

Protestors were not challenging the laws under which they were charged -- just calling attention; Congress had to act; other ways to encourage this

Necessity is a utilitarian defense, maximizing social welfare by allowing a crime to be committed where the social benefits of the crime outweigh the social costs of failing to commit the crime 

## Duress:  Common Law {#slide-10}

Common Law Requirements

Well-founded fear generated by a human being,

Fear must be reasonable

Note difference from necessity, which traditionally required a natural threat

Threat of imminent death or serious bodily harm to the actor, AND

Most states recognize a third-person provision to the threat, i.e. "to the actor or a third person."

The defendant hasn't created or provoked the threat of death or serious bodily injury

Note:  Once the threat stops, the criminal conduct must stop.

## Duress:  Model Penal Code {#slide-11}

MPC § 2.09

(1) It is an affirmative defense that the actor was coerced to do so by the use of, or a threat to use, unlawful force against his person or third person, which a person of reasonable firmness in his situation would've been unable to resist

(2) This defense is unavailable if the actor recklessly placed himself in a situation in which it was probable that he would be subjected to duress. The defense is also unavailable if he was negligent in placing himself in such a situation, whenever negligence suffices to convict.

(3) It is not a defense that a woman acted on the command of her husband, unless she acted under coercion under (1).

(4) When the conduct of the actor would otherwise be justifiable under MPC 3.02, this section doesn't preclude a defense. 

## Duress:  Case Law {#slide-12}

State v. Toscano  (N.J. 1977)

Facts :  Toscano was charged with insurance fraud but argued that he was under duress. He claimed that he was fearful of harm by the alleged architect of the conspiracy.

Holding :  Toscano is entitled to a duress jury instruction.

Reasoning :  New Jersey doesn't have a duress statute, so we use common law principles.

The threat of harm must be "present, imminent and pending" and "of such a nature as to induce a well grounded apprehension of death or serious bodily harm if the act is not done."

To excuse a crime, the threatened injury must induce "such a fear as a man of ordinary fortitude and courage might justly yield to."

Loss of job, denial of food rations, economic need, and prospect of financial ruin are inadequate.

## Duress:  Case Law {#slide-13}

U.S. v. Fleming  (U.S. Ct. Mil. App. 1957)

Facts :  Defendant was court martialed for collaborating with Korean combatants when he was held captive. The alleged collaboration occurred after forced marches, physical abuse, and threats of being left for dead in a cave. The military judge instructed that  duress was available  only if he had a well-grounded apprehension of immediate and impending death or of immediate serious bodily harm. Fleming was convicted.

Holding :  Defendant is not entitled to the duress defense.

Reasoning :  Fleming's resistance had not brought him to the last ditch; the danger of death or serious bodily harm was not immediate.

If being a POW doesn't present a (constant) threat of immediate harm, I don't know what will.
