## **STATEMENT OF FACTS**

	This case concerns retaliation and fair use claims between a songwriting company, EchoCraft, and its ex-departmental manager Philip Rivens. The claims arise from EchoCraft’s termination of Riven after his informal internal investigation into potential gender disparities in year-end bonuses, and EchoCraft’s subsequent release of a revised, factually accurate version of Riven’s copyrighted song, “Revere Paul Revere.”

1. Philip Riven Became Suspicious of Potential Gender Discrimination Within EchoCraft After Discussion at an Employee’s Holiday Party

In September 2018, Philip Riven (“Riven”) joined EchoCraft as a songwriter in the company’s song-writing department. Following consistently strong performance reviews, Riven was promoted to the Manager of the department. R. at 6\. In the years 2021 and 2022, Riven and his department consistently exceeded expectations, producing more than 30 songs per quarter in 2021 and more than 25 per quarter in 2022, receiving 3 out of 5 songs nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Country Song. R. at 89\. In the reviews, he was cited as a “pleasant personality” who enhanced collegiality and a “powerhouse” that maximized the productivity of his employees. R at 88-89. Despite the overwhelmingly positive reviews, it was noted that he sometimes can get offtracked, working on his “own projects” during business hours. The reviewer found that this should not be an issue as long as he “continues to meet \[his\] quotas.” R. at 89\.  
On or about December 21, 2022, Riven was engaged in a conversation with Moses, a manager from another department, at the company’s holiday party. During their talk, Moses and several of her employees expressed concerns that employees in her department were receiving lower bonuses than Riven’s employees despite having similar performance reviews. R. at 6\.   
In January 2023, Riven and Moses went to Daphne Sniff (“Sniff”) to discuss their concerns regarding the alleged discrepancies in bonuses. R. at 6\. Sniff told Riven that she did not believe in any discrimination in the assignment of bonuses but that he was “welcome to look into the matter.” *Id*. 

1. Riven Begins His Investigation Into Bonus Disparities

Between January and May of 2023, Riven began his own investigation into the matter. He interviewed approximately 81 employees across approximately 12 departments and asked them about their performance reviews and bonuses. R. at 7\. During this time, Riven and his department were producing less than 20 songs per quarter. R. at 92\. On July 5, 2023, Riven was issued a formal warning by Sniff, who informed Riven that his songwriting department had failed to meet the production quotas for the previous 6 consecutive months. R. at 7\. On the same day, Sniff also informed Moses that she had failed to meet her department’s songwriting quotas for the past 6 consecutive months, though Moses did not receive a formal warning. *Id.*   
	On or about August 18, 2023, Riven emailed a summary of the findings of his investigations to Sniff. The next day, Sniff replied with another email saying that she “takes these concerns very seriously.” In the same email, she also questioned whether this investigation was the “best use of \[Riven’s\] time.” R. at 7\.   
	Riven’s performance continued to decline over the course of the year. In Q3 and Q4 of the year 2023, Riven and his department only produced about 12 and 10 songs respectively, considerably less than the departmental quota of 25 songs per quarter. R. at 92\. Finally, on December 21, 2023, EchoCraft terminated Riven from the company, citing unsatisfactory performance and a consistent failure to meet songwriting quotas. R. at 7\. 

2. Following his Termination, Riven Began Independent Business Ventures with Columbia Grammar School.

In December of 2023, Riven composed an education song for his personal use with aims to help educate his daughter about Paul Revere. It was titled “Revere Paul Revere.” This was written in order to help her study for her history class. The song used key themes in the historical story including midnight rides and the British.  
In January 2024, his song about Paul Revere became a hit, and this led to Riven discussing with the school principal, Elle Toobin, at Columbia Grammar School its use and composition, and to possibly make future educational songs. Toobin paid Riven $500 for preliminary negotiations. At this time, Riven registered a copyright for his song with the U.S. Copyright Office for “Revere Paul Revere.” During this same month, EchoCraft’s CEO released a version of the song titled “Revere Paul Revere?”, which was for high-school level educational content. It was released through it’s not-for-profit education division which produces educational American History songs for high school students.  
In February 2024, negotiations between Riven and Toobin were terminated by the principle’s will. Riven’s believed that EchoCraft caused this, taking away the market from his song.  
This led to two causes of action for Riven. First, that EchoCraft terminated him as a retaliatory act for him looking into the bonus pay discrimination based on gender. He also believes they stole his song and negatively affected the market for “Revere Paul Revere,” leading to monetary damages.  
The District granted summary judgment for the Title VII claim, establishing that Riven didn’t establish a prima facie case for retaliation. They also granted Summary Judgment for the Copyright infringement claim, it was found that EchoCraft’s use was fair use. 

1. ## **The Statutory Framework in Fair Use**

To determine whether the use of “Revere Paul Revere?” constitutes a violation of copyright, we must look to 17 U.S.C. § 107, Limitations on Exclusive Rights: Fair Use. This statute lays out four requirements that the court must balance in order to figure out if an item constitutes fair use. If the court finds that it is fair use, this is a complete defense to copyright infringement. This is a balancing test, so all factors are weighed together, and it is up to the court’s discretion to determine whether the elements are met. The idea of a balancing test traces to the early case of *Folsom v. Marsh*, in which the court balanced all four of the factors. It was held in this case that copying more than 300 pages was not fair use, and an injunction against the defendants was issued. Later, in *Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc*., the Supreme Court emphasized that “the more transformative the new work is, the less significant are other factors, like commercialism, that might weigh against finding of fair use, even though transformative use is not absolutely necessary for finding of fair use; transformative works lie at the heart of the fair use doctrine's guarantee of breathing space within the confines of copyright” (1164).

2. ## **Factor 1: The Purpose and Character of the Use**

The first factor examines whether the use is transformative. It asks whether the work was given new meaning or merely copied and pasted, focusing on the purpose and character of the use.  
EchoCraft’s song is highly transformative because it alters the meaning of Riven’s work. Created by a non-profit educational department for educational purposes, the song is best classified as comment/criticism. By its title, it questions the original. Ryan Raine’s purpose was to correct the historical narrative for students studying for an exam. Riven’s work paints Revere as a patriotic hero, while Raine shows the opposite. Raine’s lines, “though others helped raise that warning’s light... he was not the only rider on that road... history’s chorus reduced to a single heartbeat,” point to a correction. The use of Riven’s lines was crucial to show a contrast and point to agreed-upon facts.  
In *Campbell*, a rap group used portions of a song, including the opening line. The remainder differed significantly. The court held the song was a parody that made fair use. It did not use more of the song than necessary and did not adversely affect the market. Although the group sold the song for commercial purposes, the different lyrics made it a parody. Taking the first line, the heart of the work, was essential to that purpose. Creative pieces differ, and these works had different audiences, reducing market impact. There is no across-the-board rule for the weight given to each factor.  
Examining the first factor, as the rap group took the heart of “Pretty Women,” Raine took the background information needed to convey the similarities and differences in the tale. The heart of Riven’s work, that Paul Revere was a hero, was not taken. Therefore, this meets the threshold easier. Fair use is allowed as long as the piece is criticizing or commenting. Raine’s purpose was to show a different look at history. This approach teaches students that history is nuanced. Seven out of 14 lines are used to convey the differences between established fact and what is debated. Just like in *Campbell*, the rest is commentary.  
The purpose of both songs was to aid education. One form is a simplistic narrative while the other is a nuanced, factually correct way to convey the story. This is an objective standard. Raine’s work is not commercial; its purpose was to clarify historical meaning for schools. It was produced by EchoCraft’s non-profit educational division, which releases songs for educational enlightenment.  
Raine thought a similar style would help underscore significant changes. It was required to show differences and similarities in a historically inaccurate story. Raine testified: “in order to underscore the extent of the inaccuracies, I only changed the parts that were factually incorrect” (71). Added parts show Paul Revere was not a hero, but a traitor. While Riven highlights him as a positive figure, Raine’s narrative does the opposite, making a “concerted effort to tone down the effusive nature of the original song and make it far more historically accurate.”  
In *Andy Warhol Foundation v. Goldsmith*, it was held that a new work cannot merely supersede the original; it must add something new with a different character. The court held that changing aesthetic style alone is not transformative. As portraits of Prince used to depict Prince in magazine stories, the original photograph and the copying use shared the same purpose.  
This case is dissimilar as EchoCraft’s song adds a different meaning to who Paul Revere was. While both works share an audience, it is a simplistic view to say the purpose is the same. Rather, it adds a new dimension: Was he unique? Was he a traitor? Or was he just one story of many?  
In *Santos v. Kimmel*, it is argued that “whether a secondary use is transformative turns on what a reasonable observer thinks, not the subjective intent of the copyright holder or that of the secondary user” (34). Several videos were rebroadcasted on a late-night show without permission. Santos sued, arguing copyright infringement and believing the video exceeded the scope of the platform's terms. The videos were made for individuals Kimmel invented using fictitious names, rather than a collaboration. The holding came out in favor of Kimmel; just as he used the videos to comment on a willingness to say "absurd things for money," EchoCraft uses Riven’s song to comment on the nuance of history versus a simplistic approach.

*Blanch v. Koons* held that using an image for satire to give a new message constitutes fair use. A photographer took a picture of a woman’s legs to show an erotic sense. Koons used the legs in a painting to comment on how basic appetites are mediated by popular images. Koons’ work was highly transformative, using the original as raw material for an entirely different type of art. Similarly, Raine used the raw material in Riven’s work to further the purpose of commenting on the history mentioned.

3. ## **Factor 2: The Nature of the Copyrighted Work**

Creative works get more protection, as the purpose of the statute is to protect them from people using their work and not being given back profit, but also it is key to highlight that courts want to incentivise different ideas. Furthermore, published works are more likely to support fair use than unpublished works.   
*Harper & Row Publishers, Inc. v. Nation Enters*, addresses copyright infringement of unpublished works and the limits of fair use. It was held that the magazine's unauthorized publication of verbatim quotes from essentially the “heart” of unpublished presidential memoirs, which was intended to supplant copyright holders' commercially valuable right of first publication, was not a “fair use” within the meaning of the Copyright Revision Act.”(2218). Riven’s work was published, he had already introduced his work to the public and was actively seeking to profit from its existing popularity. The students already had heard Riven’s song, so the problem identified in *Harper* is not identical. 

4. ## **Factor 3: Amount and Substantiality of the Portion Used**

In *Fisher v. Dees*, Marvin Fisher and Jack Segal owned a copyright for “When Sunny Gets Blue.” Defendant Rick Dees released a parody of the song that copied the first six of the song's thirty-eight bars of music, its recognizable main theme. In addition, it changes the original's opening lyric. This song was as creative a work as Riven’s song. The court states that, “in view of the parody's medium, its purposes, and its brevity, it takes no more from the original than is necessary to reasonably accomplish its parodic purpose” (439). In EchoCraft’s version of the song, they also did not use any more than necessarily needed to draw on the song. The key parts in drawing on Riven’s work was that the same factual basis does exist, but it leads to a different outcome: Paul Revere being a traitor. It gives the audience a more nuanced view in this way to show them that there are parts of history that are viewable from a different lens.   
Additionally, as stated in *Campbell*, the heart of the work is necessary when discussing this factor. The heart of Riven’s work is the message that Paul Revere was a hero. This was not taken, this is the exact fact that EchoCraft was commenting on. The most substantial feature of the work is this, which is what should be focused on rather than the quantitative value of how many lines were taken. Campbell established that you can take a lot as long as it is necessary to conjure up or transform the original so the audience understands what you are criticizing.

5. ## **Factor 4: Effect of the Use Upon the Potential Market**

The fourth factor, along with the first, is often considered central to the fair use analysis, as it safeguards copyright holders from unauthorized market substitution and economic exploitation. ‘‘We ask not whether the second work would damage the market for the first (by, for example, devaluing it through parody or criticism), but whether it usurps the market for the first by offering a competing substitute.’’ (*Hachette Book Grp*.) This case exemplifies that there is a difference between devaluing and usurping the market. Devaluing would be a case in which Raine’s song points out the mistakes in Riven’s song so well that people stop liking Riven’s song. This would be allowed and is what is shown here through the Principal’s testimony. She preferred the song, and this is what fair market competition looks like. On the other hand, Raine’s song is not a substitute/usurpation because it is made to point out a different perspective. When the song was made, there was no purpose of getting rid of Riven’s song or providing something different for schools, but rather to point to what some would believe to be factual mistakes and give a nuanced view. They can coexist, and it is up to the listener which approach they want to adopt, or they can appreciate both.  
Carol Publishing Group published a book with trivia questions about a show in *Castle Rock Entertainment v. Carol Publishing*. All the trivia questions used the show as a reference, sometimes directly quoting it. It was held that this use was not transformative enough because it merely summarized crucial points in the show. Thus, the book infringed upon the potential market for the show. As opposed to EchoCraft’s song, it is not merely changing Riven’s work into a different form for Riven’s fans, but challenging it for students’ understanding.  
Further, in *Authors Guild v. Google Inc.*, Google created a search engine that digitized books and other published works, allowing users to search the text and view limited snippets. The authors argued that this practice infringed their copyright. The court found for Google based on a key point: it wasn’t a substitute. Google was not trying to stop people from buying the books; rather, this arguably incentivized people to buy them. Again, EchoCraft wasn’t trying to compete and had a separate purpose when creating the work.

6. ## **Rebuttal of Potential Arguments**

One may argue that EchoCraft is a large for-profit business, therefore the use in any way because of the company's goals and agenda would lead to profit. This would cut against fair use, especially in the first prong, but this is a very limited scope of viewing it. The division in which the song was published was the non-profit education division. Under *Campbell*, the focus is the character of the use, which in this case is education. Just because the goal of the company is to profit does not alone show that there was a commercial gain from this product. Furthermore, Raine did testify that the company started performing better after the production of the song, but this could be due to other reasons, and either way Riven wouldn’t be able to get compensated on the fame of other music that he did not make.

7. ## **Conclusion**

In sum, EchoCraft’s song “Revere Paul Revere?” constitutes fair use because its primary purpose was to comment on and criticize Riven’s original work. Although Riven’s song is a creative work, it was already published and being utilized in an educational setting, which allows for a broader scope of fair use. Furthermore, the amount of material taken was not a substantial portion of the original work and did not misappropriate its "heart". Rather, EchoCraft only utilized the most crucial parts necessary to achieve its transformative purpose of providing a more nuanced and historically accurate approach to history. Finally, EchoCraft’s use does not usurp Riven’s market, as it serves a distinct educational function rather than acting as a competing substitute  
