## **Slate: Concessions are for Girlie Men: Arnold Schwarzenegger's absurdly advantageous contract for Terminator 3.**

[BY [EDWARD JAY
EPSTEIN](https://slate.com/author/edward-jay-epstein)]{.mark}

[MAY 09, 200511:11 AM]{.mark}

[The nonstop anecdotes that stars give in celebrity interviews about the
stunts they supposedly performed, their favorite hobbies, and how much
they enjoyed working with other stars may serve to hype their latest
project---a job they are contractually required to do---but they evade a
central issue: The art of the deal has come to replace the art of
movies. To understand how the new Hollywood really works, one need only
read stars' contracts. Consider, for example, Gov. Arnold
Schwarzenegger's agreement for *Terminator 3: The Rise of the Machines*.
It's a state-of-the-art exercise in deal-making.]{.mark}

[The contract, which was brilliantly put together by the Hollywood
superlawyer Jacob Bloom between June 2000 and December 2001---requiring
no fewer than 21 drafts---runs 33 pages (including appendices). For
starters, Schwarzenegger got a \$29.25 million "pay or play" fee,
meaning he would be paid whether or not the movie was made. (At the
time, that figure was a record for guaranteed compensation.) The first
\$3 million would be delivered on signing and the balance during the
course of principal photography. For every week the shooting ran over
its 19-week schedule, Schwarzenegger would receive an additional \$1.6
million in "overage." Then there was the "perk package"---a lump sum of
\$1.5 million for private jets, a fully equipped gym trailer,
three-bedroom deluxe suites on locations, round-the-clock limousines,
and personal bodyguards.]{.mark}

[The producers Mario Kassar and Andrew Vajna did not agree to pay
Schwarzenegger this record sum because he possessed unique acting
skills---after all, the part he was to play (along with a digital double
and stuntmen) was that of a slow-speaking robot. They also did not pay
Schwarzenegger on the basis of his box-office track record. Indeed, his
previous two films---*End of Days (1999)* and *The Sixth Day
(2000)---*had failed both at the world box office and at video rental
stores. Nevertheless, in the 10 years that had elapsed since *Terminator
2: Judgment Day*, Schwarzenegger's image had become so inexorably linked
in video games and TV reruns to the deadly robot that he had become the
crucial element of the deal.]{.mark}

[Kassar and Vajna, backed by the German-owned movie financier Intermedia
Films, had already bought the sequel rights to the *Terminator*
franchise for \$14.5 million from the bankrupt Carolco Pictures and the
initial producer, Gale Anne Hurd, and had spent another \$5.2 million
developing a script. Finally, they had lined up more than \$160 million
in financing: Warner Bros. would pay \$51.6 million for North American
rights, the Tokyo distributor Toho-Towa would pay \$20 million for
Japanese rights, Sony Pictures Entertainment would pay \$77.4 million
for the rest of the world, and Intermedia would earn another \$11
million by transferring the copyright to German tax shelters. But Warner
Bros., Sony. and Toho-Towa had all made their deals conditional on
Schwarzenegger signing on to play the robot. So: No Schwarzenegger, no
money.]{.mark}

[Kassar and Vajna had no real choice but to accept Schwarzenegger's
terms (and they themselves would earn \$10 million if the deal went
through). Schwarzenegger's demands did not stop with the guarantee of
\$29.25 million. He also insisted on---and got---20 percent of the gross
receipts made by the venture from every market in the world---including
movie theaters, videos, DVDs, television licensing, in-flight
entertainment, game licensing, and so forth---once the movie had reached
its cash break-even point. Such "contingent compensation" is not unusual
in movie contracts, but, in most cases, Hollywood accounting famously
uses smoke and mirrors to make sure to define "break-even" in such a way
that a movie never reaches it.]{.mark}

[Take video and DVD sales, for example. Under the standard Hollywood
contract, studios credit the film with a video "royalty" equal only to
20 percent of the sales. That means that if sales of a DVD total \$20
million, only \$4 million of that is counted toward reaching the
break-even point. But Schwarzenegger's contract, thanks to the ingenious
lawyering of Jake Bloom, allowed for no such evasion. In the case of DVD
and video royalties, the contract specifies: "For purposes of
calculating Cash Break even only, Adjusted Gross Receipts shall include
a 100% home video royalty (i.e. home video revenues less costs)." So
unlike weaker players, Schwarzenegger could count all the money taken in
from DVDs and video, \$20 million, less their actual cost, toward
reaching the threshold where he gets his cut. (Click
[here](http://www.edwardjayepstein.com/ASContract.htm) to see how his
contract defines cash break-even.) Since these payments to
Schwarzenegger pushed back the cash break-even point of other
participants---and added to the costs of the movie---it effectively came
at the expense of less powerful talent (like writers) in the contract
game.]{.mark}

[Schwarzenegger also could decide who worked with him. The contract
"pre-approval" clause gave him choice of not only the director (Jonathan
Mostow) and the principal cast, but also his hairdresser (Peter
Toothbal), his makeup man (Jeff Dawn), his driver (Howard Valesco), his
stand-in (Dieter Rauter), his stunt double (Billy Lucas), the unit
publicist (Sheryl Merin), his personal physician (Dr. Graham Waring),
and his cook (Steve Hunter).]{.mark}

[Finally, Schwarzenegger had the contract structured to give him every
possible tax advantage. All the money was to be paid not to
Schwarzenegger but to Oak Productions Inc., a corporate front he
controlled. Oak Productions, in return, "lends" Schwarzenegger's
services to the production. Since Schwarzenegger didn't get any money
personally from the movie itself, he had more flexibility managing his
exposure to taxes. For example, Oak Productions entered into a complex
tax-reimbursement scheme with the production to help avoid additional
tax liabilities that might occur abroad. (Click
[here](http://www.edwardjayepstein.com/taxrider.htm) to read the tax
rider.) In return, Schwarzenegger agreed to make himself available for
18 weeks of principal photography, one week (on a nonexclusive basis)
for rehearsals---if any were required---and five days for reshooting. In
addition, he had to make himself available for at least 10 days, seven
of them abroad, for promotional activities in connection with the
initial theatrical release of the movie. This media work included
everything from television and radio appearances to appearances at
premieres and Internet chat rooms.]{.mark}

[The negotiation of this contract did not come cheaply---the legal and
accounting budget for the movie was \$2 million---and, by the time all
of Schwarzenegger's demands were met, the budget of the film had risen
to \$187.3 million, making it the most expensive independently produced
movie in history. (Click
[here](http://www.edwardjayepstein.com/budget.htm) to see where that
money went.)]{.mark}

[Even though *Terminator 3* eventually had a world box-office gross of
\$427 million (at least half of which is kept by movie theaters), it
barely broke even, except for Arnold Schwarzenegger, who, of course, had
created his own "cash break-even," and, under any scenario, made a small
fortune from his image. In the bygone days of the studio system, the
studios had exclusive contracts with their stars that allowed them to
reap the profits from the images their PR machines had created. In the
new Hollywood, the stars themselves reap the profit their brand names
bring to a film. So it is not surprising that even after Schwarzenegger
became the governor of California in 2004, his holding company protected
his image rights by suing a small toy maker selling a
Schwarzenegger-like bobblehead doll on the grounds that "Schwarzenegger
is an instantly recognizable global celebrity whose name and likeness
are worth millions of dollars and are solely his property."]{.mark}
